Nicholas Boulanger
Valentine, J.W.(1989). How good was the fossil record? Clues from the Californian Pleistocene. Paleobiology,
15(2), pp. 83--94. 

1) Article Summary
The incompleteness of the fossil record presents challenges to paleontologists, and there is concern that fossils 
cannot be taken as accurate representations of the populations that left them behind. This article sets out to 
determine how incomplete the fossil record is with respect to Pleistocene benthic invertebrates in California.
Many of the bivalves and gastropods present along the continental shelf today are also represented as fossils
from Pleistocene rocks. If the fossil record was severely distorted, one would expect that many of the species alive
today would not be present as fossils, either because their remains were destroyed by geologic events or because 
their remains failed to fossilize in the first place. Testing this hypothesis is as simple as surveying the 
species composition of living benthic invertebrates, then doing the same for the observed fossil communities and
comparing how well the two match. In this case, the living and fossilized assemblages are relatively close: 77%
of the living species are in the fossil record, and 72% of the fossilized species are still alive today. There are
significant differences between the two, however. 211 of the fossil species do not appear alive in the California 
region, and 162 of the extant species are not found as fossils.  Of the living species not found in the fossil 
record, many of them are small and/or rare and/or thin-shelled, making them poor fossilization candidates. Of the
fossilized species present in the Pleistocene rocks but not in living populations, 98 were extinct, and another 113
are absent from the Caifornian Province but do have living populations elsewhere. The article attributes this
phenomenon to changing climatic and water factors. Furthermore, continued sampling of Pleistocene fossil beds is 
likely to yield fossilized specimens of even more of the absent species. With this evidence, the authors of the 
article put forth the conclusion that the fossil record is actually quite robust with respect to common species, 
provided that they are durable and fossilize easily.

2) Things you liked about the paper
This paper is attempting to answer a difficult but important question, and I think it is designed well.
It was a smart decision to use bivalves and gastropods as the study organisms because of their abundance and the
relative ease with which they fossilize. Likewise, it was a clever idea to choose fossil beds that are recent enough
to expect a lot of similarity between living and fossilized populations. I thought that the "General Implications"
was a sound structural choice, dividing the specific details of the actual research from the bigger picture. 

3) Things you didn't like about the paper
This may be more of a crique about scientific publications in general, but why is the text presented in two
narrow columns instead of one series of paragraphs? It doesn't help fit any more words onto the page, and it's very
distracting to sort-of read the left column when one is supposed to be reading the right. In the digital age,
there is also the issue of scrolling up and down all the time to stay on the right page, but I digress. At certain
stages it didn't seem as though the process of including or exluding species made very much sense. For 
example, in the "Comparison of the Living with the Pleistocene Fauna" section the authors mention a species that
made it into the species pool on the basis of a single record. I'm sure every effort was made to construct the
species pools in a consistent manner, but maybe there was an easier and more intuitive way. 

4) Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
This paper has only one figure: a simple map of California and northern Mexico illustrating the study localities.
There isn't terribly much to say about it, except that maybe it didn't need a whole page to itself. 