Nicholas Boulanger
Global Biodiversity Scenarios for the Year 2100

1. Article Summary
This paper documents an attempt to construct scenarios for change in biodiversity worldwide by the year 2100. 
The scenarios compare a suite of drivers of biodiversity loss, including land-use change, climate change,
deposition of nitrogen, and global atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. The relative impacts of these drivers
was found to vary with biomes. Nitrogen deposition, for example, was found to have the most severe impact on 
temperate and boreal forests, because these environments are typically nitrogen limited. Deserts, in which
water is generally the limiting factor in plant growth, are predicted to be relatively insensitive to nitrogen 
deposition. The authors put forth three main scenarios for biodiversity: one, in which the effects of all the 
drivers are cumulative; a second, in which the biome responds only to the most impactful driver and ignores the
rest; and a final model in which the drivers operate synergistically, with each driver intensifying the effects
of the other drivers. Overall, the scenarios predicted that land-use change will have the largest effect for 
terrestrial ecosystems, and that invasive species will have the most impact on freshwater systems. This paper
does not evaluate marine systems at all.  The article concludes by listing the sources of uncertainty in its
analyses, particularly the sensitivity of the scenario to the assumptions behind it. Another major source of
uncertainty is the discrepancy between the three different models. In some cases, recording only the strongest
driver makes sense. The paper provides an example: if a tropical forest is cleared and an exotic crop is planted,
virtually all native species will be extirpated regardless of nitrogen deposition or climate change. 

2. Things you liked about the paper
This article is rich in biome-level predictions. If, for example, the reader is concerned specifically with the
effect of a given driver on a given biome, they will likely be able to find a reasonable prediction of that 
driver's severity for that ecosystem simply by reading the paper's text. These smaller predictions rest within
a framework of global-scale predictions that are by necessity less specific, but still useful. The article 
succeeds in its basic goal of creating and interpreting a model. 

3. Things you did not like about the paper
There are a lot of assumptions made here. It seems as though half the statements in the paper begin with, "we 
assume that..." It is understandable that a scenario designed to predict an extraordinarily complex biological
system for almost a century into the future would have to make some assumptions, but there are so many
that one eventually starts to lose faith in the predictive accuracy of the model. It is a little surprising that 
marine ecosystems are not examined at all in this study, especially when freshwater ecosystems were included.
Of course, truly accurate scenarios for oceans' responses to global biodiversity change would probably require a 
separate scenario (and article) to themselves, but what about their
effects on the terrestrial and freshwater systems? If any improved or further studies are carried out, 
incorporating marine systems would be my first recommendation.    

4. Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
This article has three figures: Figure 1 is a bar graph for the relative global importance of each driver of
change in biodiversity; Figure 2 is a similar bar graph, but divided into a separate graph for each biome; Figure 3
is a series of three world maps describing the expected change in biodiversity. Figures 1 and 2 are simple
and easy to understand. Figure 3, however, is very strange: what are the units of biodiversity change? Without
understanding what the numbers mean, the colors don't have any real significance, so the whole graph is a waste of 
space. 