Nicholas Boulanger
Barnosky, A.D., Matzke, N., Tomiya, S., Wogan, G.O.U., Swartz, B., Quental, T.B., Marshall, C., McGuire, J.L.,
Lindsey, E.L., Maguire, K.C., Mersey, B., and Ferrer, E.A. (2011). Has the Earth's sixth mass extinction already
arrived? Nature v.471 p.51-57. 

1) Article Summary
This article compares modern extinctions to the Big Five mass extinctions of the past. This is a difficult 
comparison for several reasons: fossils are geographically and temporally scattered, while assessments of modern
threatened taxa are frequent and intense. Assessing modern rates of extinction is also difficult, because
the vast majority of extant species have not been assessed for extinction risk. Nevertheless, the authors
of this paper used projected extinctions of IUCN "Red List" taxa to examine how quickly the Earth would reach
the 75% biodiversity loss typical of past mass extinctions under the current rate of extinction. The analysis
took into account the two main characteristics of extinction: rate, and magnitude. The results of this research
indicate that the extinction rate the Earth is currently experiencing for many taxa is much higher than the 
expected background rate, and that Big Five-level extinction magnitudes could be reached in the next few centuries.
Thus, if currently threatened taxa go extinct in the coming decades, the Sixth mass extinction will become a 
reality. 


2) Things you liked about the paper
I thought that this paper's methodology was very strong. Addressing the disparity in data between the modern
and the prehistoric is very problematic, but I think the solution of binning extinctions to extrapolate observed
modern extinctions into a rate of extinctions per million specis/years was fairly elegant. I am also appreciate of
this paper's call to action on conservation. It isn't often that the results of research such as this lend 
themselves so readily to actual recommendations of action, but this is obviously an exception. 

3) Things you didn't like about the paper
This paper's conclusions are greatly limited by the inadequacy of available data. Extinctions of prehistoric taxa
almost always occur after the last observed fossils, the extinction rates for mammals between one million years
ago and fifty thousand years ago cannot be accurately estimated, modern marine invertebrates are poorly sampled
compared to their fossilized counterparts, and the list goes on. While the statistical methods used have done an 
admirable job of extracting signals from this mess, the reality is that one "can't make bricks without clay".  
 
4) Evaluate the graphs and figures( if any)
This paper has three figures. Figure 1 is a scatter plot depicting the relationship between time-interval length
and extinctions per million species/years for mammals. This plot makes the distinction between "normal"
extinction rates and the accelerated ones that have been observed in the past centuries. Removing bats and 
endemic species also seems like a good idea, given the underrepresented nature of bats in the fossil record. 
Figure 2 is a comparison of the extinction magnitudes of specific taxa in comparison to the 75% Big Five benchmark.
This figure illustrates how close some modern taxa are to reaching mass-extinction level depletions of biodiversity.
Figure 3 demonstrates the relationship between the two characteristics of extinction: rate and magnitude. This
figure also illustrates the Earth's proximity to mass extinction number six, but it doesn't do so quite as
elegantly. I had to read the caption and the accompanying results text carefully in order to understand this figure.
Overall, the figures are detailed and clear. 