Nicholas Boulanger
Latitudinal Response Curves

1. Article Summary
The authors of this paper are asking the question, "did marine bivalve and gastropod genera shift their 
distributions towards the poles during the Cenezoic era?". Using occurences from the PaleoDB, the authors used
Gaussian logistic regressions to determine, for each genus of marine bivalve or gastropod, what latitudes it can
tolerate, where its preferred latitude is, and what its peak abundance is at its preferred latitude. A Gaussian
logistic regression simply finds how well a set of data approximates an exponential relationship. What they found 
was that every genus studied followed the same general "hollow curve" pattern, in which the number of dramatic 
shifts in distribution was dwarfed by the number of tiny shifts. This pattern held up both in epoch-to-epoch and
stage-to-stage time scales. Overall, the researchers found virtually no evidence that the genera studied migrated
towards the poles over the Cenezoic era, a finding inconsistent with many similar studies. The paper gives many
reasons as to why this may be; the favorite explanation is that the tropics foster the highest densities of
bivalves and gastropods even as their range expands north- and southward toward the poles. More than anything,
the evidence suggests that these marine genera essentially prefer to stay in the same place, and change their 
distributions little even in the face of dramatic climactic and biological disturbances.    

2.Things you liked about the paper
This article is 'bookended' very well. The introduction states quite clearly what the paper is about, how the
analyses were going to be presented, and how conclusions were to be drawn from the results. Likewise, the 
conclusion illuminates the central findings of the paper, and what the significance of those findings might be; the
conclusion 'delivers' on the promises made in the introduction, and the two complement each other to make sure
the reader is not disoriented. In addition, the conclusion very frankly admits that the authors' findings are not
in accord with what many others have found, and clearly lists several possibilities as to why. Thus, this article
seems to demonstrate that it knows its role among the greater scientific literature.


3.Things you didn't like about the paper
The figures, in general, are confusing. In particular, Figure 2 is formatted in a seriously bizarre and 
unintuitive way. The placement of the quantitative values on the mirror side of each plot is unnecessarily
complex and detracts from the information the figure is trying to convey. Was print space so critical that
this was the only way to squeeze all of them in? If this is the case, omitting a few of the regression figures
would be no serious loss and would make understanding the remainder that much easier.

4. Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
This article has five figures: the first is a representation of the latitudinal response curve, the second
is a sort of collage of preferred latitude and tolerance plots, the following pair are graphs of the Gaussian 
logistic regressions, and the last is a histogram of tropical versus extratropical ocurrences in the PaleoDBfor
each of the epochs in the time studied. The first figure could do with some simplification; it isn't displaying
experimental data, it is just an illustration of a concept. Given this,the number of labels is very redundant and 
distracting. Figures 3 and 4 are actually quite clear and informative in a vacuum, but their placement is a little
awkward. If one of the main points of the paper is that the epoch- and stage-level time scales show similar
patterns, why not put the graphs on subsequent pages, or even side-by-side? Figure 5 is the only figure in which
I find no flaws; it seems reasonably clear, reasonably well placed, and reasonably well captioned.  