Nicholas Boulanger
Peters, Shanan E., and Foote, Michael(2002). Determinants of extinction in the fossil record.
Nature 416, 420-424.

1) Article Summary
The fossil record is incomplete, but it is all we as paleontologists have to work with. When the subject of inquiry
is mass extinctions, one may believe that the worldwide devastation of most life would leave clear and obvious 
traces, but one would be wrong. This article examines in detail how our understanding of mass extinctions may be
distorted by the fossil record. This distortion begins with the simple availability of rock: one cannot collect
fossils from nothing, and some time periods are better represented by the stratigraphic record than others. 
For example, If the last few million years of a species' geologic lifespan are spent in poorly preserved rock, 
paleontologists may be forced to conclude that it went extinct before it actually did.  The authors address this
topic further by generating a mathematical model based on observed stratigraphic preservation but a uniform 
extinction rate over the Phanerozoic. A high agreement was observed between the model-predicted data and the 
observed rate of genus extinction. The article puts forth two possible explanations for this agreement: one, that
extinctions are not nearly as volatile as the fossil record indicates, and "mass extinctions" are spurious artefacts
of irregular stratigraphic preservation; and two, that volatility in the stratigraphic record and in extinction 
rates has the same root cause. More research is, of course, necessary to determine with greater certainty which 
of these explanations are correct, but either way we have learned something about the stability of life across
geologic time, at least at the genus level. 

2) Things you liked about the paper
As I have stated before, I enjoy reading papers with Nature's format, i.e. technical descriptions of the methods
segregated from the rest of the article. Of course, the peer review system requires that every part of the
research process be put under scrutiny, so this information has to be available somewhere, but most readers have 
neither the interest or the means to replicate the study, so why make them read how to do so? Instead, the focus
should be on what has been learned, and in that sense this article is a success.

3) Things you didn't like about the paper

4) Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
This article has three figures, all of them graphs. Figure 1 depicts a series of relationships between the number of
formations and the extinction rate. The first is a line graph, and the second and third are scatters,
one with no lag and another with a one-stage lag on extinctions. Overall, this figure represents a fairly good
argument for a one-stage lag on extinction rate. Figure 2 uses a similar assemblage of graphs, but they instead
represent observed extinction rates versus the ones predicted by the mathematical model. Figure 3 is a null
distribution of correlation coefficients between formation time series- randomly generating a temporal order
of formations and calculating the degree of relatedness to discern how accurate the model is. All of the figures 
have reasonable, but not outstanding, clarity. 

     

