Nicholas Boulanger
Payne, J.L., and Finnegan, S., 2007. The effect of geographic range on extinction risk during background and
mass extinction. PNAS v.104, n.25, p.10506-10511.


Article Summary
This article sets out to answer several questions related to mass extinctions. The authors performed logistic
regression analysis on marine benthic invertebrate data from the Paleontology Database to determine whether 
geographic range size acts as a buffer against extinction. They found that geographic range size is positively
correlated with genus-level survival, and that species richness does not influence this advantage. The picture
is still somewhat cloudy, however. Mass extinction events are not as picky about what survives; therefore,
extinctions of geographically widespread genera are more likely to be driven extinct by widespread ecological and
environmental disruption than by local changes. Furthermore, when extinction likelihood is high, the influence
of geographic range size wanes.

Things you liked about the paper
I can't fault their methods or results. Their use of logistic regression and log-odds is appropriate, and I
believe that they compensated for potentially confounding factors, such as heterogeneity in the fossil record,
in a logical manner. 


Things you didn't like about the paper
Althought the question of this article could be interesting, I could barely stand reading it to the end. 
A good scientific paper is essentially storytelling backed  up by sound data. To all appearances, the sound 
data is here, but there's no story. Instead, there's a series of very complicated and technical explanations of 
things that are often only tangentially related to the research itself. For example, the first paragraph of the
'Results' section contains no results. Instead, there's an extremely long-winded explanation of how logistic
regression works, and why the authors used it, and what log-odds of zero mean- the sort of thing that most
scientists already know, and that nobody needs a refresher on in the middle of trying to read about some research
on mass extinctions. This style continues for the rest of the paper. The sections just sort of ramble on, without a
sense of chronological or conceptual progress. Most of the sentences are extremely long and contain multiple 
statements separated by commas and semicolons. This unnecessarily adds complexity to otherwise simple ideas. 
It might have helped if there were more paragraphs separating essential chunks of information, but I think that the
authors just needed to have a better grasp of word choice, sentence structure, and other tenets of successful 
writing in the English language. This is absolutely scientific writing at its worst.  

Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
This article contains three graphs and one table. Like the text they support, the graphs do not give up information
easily. Figure 1 is a timeline of trends in the selectivity of extinctions; in the caption readers are treated
to short course in evaluating log-odds AGAIN. It's almost insulting. Why didn't they just leave it in the Data and
Methods, under "logistic regression", where it belongs?  