Nicholas Boulanger
Hendy, Austin J.W.(2009).The influence of lithification on Cenozoic marine biodiversity trends. Paleobiology,
35(1), pp. 51-62. 

1) Article Summary
This article describes a potential bias in the fossil record. There is a huge difference in the observed 
diversity of benthic marine genera between thee Paleozoic and Cenozoic, even when one corrects for 
time-averaging and other distorting environmental conditions. However, the analyses in this paper suggest that
this explosion of biodiversity is at least in part the result of differential preservation and recovery of fossils.
This has to do with the availability of fossil deposits of late Mesozoic or Cenozoic agee that are unlithified.
Fossil beds can have lithified, poorly lithified, or unlithified matrices surrounding the fossils. These terms
reflect how well-consolidated the substrate is, with unlithified substrates being entirely unconsolidated and 
highly lithified ones being rocky slabs. Unlithified deposits are much more available for Cenozoic benthic marine
genera than for Paleozoic benthic marine genera. Since unlithified fossil deposits are easier to collect from, a 
sampling bias may be present. Additionally, unlithified deposits preserve organisms differently. Lithification
often involves cementation by carbonate, which can destroy shells and other hard tissues. Lithified fossils
are also more subject to compaction, as well as damage during collection or preparation. Between sampling bias
and differential preservation, there is a significant difference in the available information for Paleozoic
versus Cenozoic benthic communities. The article concludes that this bias could account for up to half of the
biodiversity changes observed between the Paleozoic and Cenozoic, and that further research into this issue is
necessary to determine how influential this difference in availability is. 

2) Things you liked about the paper
Scientists are only as good as the information available to them. I like that this article is critical of the
sources of information (namely, fossils) and not the conclusions drawn from that information. I think the article
described in sufficient detail their methods, especially how they distinguished unlithified, poorly lithified,
and lithified samples. 

3) Things you didn't like about the paper
I am not certain this paper needed to be as long as it is. I spotted a few instances in which a passage in the
article was little more than a reiteration of a previous statement, which is expected and even laudable if the
repeated statements were critical parts of the article's message. The repetitions in this paper seemed to be
relatively trivial elements of the methods and results, which leads me to conclude that this paper could have 
been shortened for  a clearer argument. 

4) Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
This paper has five figures, all of them graphs of some type. Figure 1 describes the relationship between 
the number of marine invertebrate genera and time, as well as that betweenn time and the percentage of collections
that were taken from unlithified versus lithified deposits. Figure 2 depicts the relationship between the number
of genera and the degree of lithification. Figures 3 and 4 are rarefaction curves for specimens of varying 
lithification; Figure 3 uses bulk samples from Wanganui Basin in New Zealand and Figure 4 uses only samples
dominated by a bivalve called Tawera from the same place. Finally, Figure 5 is a bar graph of the influence of
lithification on the taphonomic features of the fossil remains. All of these graphs share common problems.
With the possible exception of figures 3 and 4, the graphs are quite small; all of the figures contain multiple
graphs, and none of the figures encompass much more than half of a page. The small graphs are often followed by 
cumbersome, long captions, and this is a bad combination because graphs should "speak for themselves". I believe
that this paper could be significantly improved if its graphs were larger and more detailed, and thus needed
only brief captions. 