Nicholas Boulanger
"Niche conservatism above the species level"

1. Article Summary
Niche conservatism is the idea that traits that allow species to survive in their environments are persistent over
time. Here, the authors evaluate the idea that niche conservatism as a concept fits better with genera or families
than with species. To test this hypothesis, researchers examined fossil data for the ranges of North American 
mammals between the Late Pleistocene and Late Holocene (LP and LH, respectively), a period of about 130,000 years.
Their findings indicated that niche conservatism does, in fact, occur above the species level- genuses that lost 
species between the LP and the LH did not have reduced ranges at the LH. In other words, while species went extinct,
the higher taxa (genuses and families) did not change overall but maintained their range sizes relative to each
other. The implication is that if a species goes extinct, other species within its genus or species will expand
their ranges to compensate, and the collective range of all genus members does not change. Thus, the range of an
individual species may be more a product of its competitive ability against other species in its genus or family
than a product of its abiotic tolerances or interactions with entirely different organisms.    

2. Things you liked about the paper
This paper has a somewhat unusual presentation strategy, in which the introduction, results, and discussion
appear first, and the materials and methods are located at the end. This is an efficient layout; it keeps the 
casual reader's mind focused on the big picture while still providing detailed technical information to those who
need it. Indeed, the materials and methods may be improved by this change because they can be long and meticulous
without fear of losing the reader's attention. The actual argument of the paper is well reasoned; the authors
recognize the shortcomings of their experimental design without undermining the validity of their results. For 
example, they recognize that their data are only for mammals, and that other groups may exhibit different patterns.
Nevertheless, they have much evidence that niche conservatism is where many traits are conserved, at least for 
mammals.

3. Things you didn't like about the paper
One thing to consider is that fossils tend to be difficult to identify to the species level. In that sense,
this article's findings could be considered a self-fulfilling prophecy in which traits present in remains 
which were never accurately categorized into species are now found to be conserved at the genus or family level
to which the fossils were assigned in the first place. I'm not convinced this completeley invalidates this paper,
or others like it, but it is an issue that the paper fails to address. 

4. Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
This article contains four figures. The first is a bar graph displaying the change in range area for each of the
mammal genera studied, and indicating that most of the range sizes increased in the last 130,000 years. The second
is a cluster of example ranges for mammal genera at LP and LH. For clarity, each rangeis laid over
a map of the United States. Figure 3 is a simple correlation between LP range size and LH range size for each 
genus (r-squared=0.6246). The last figure displays the positions of each species population within each genus, also 
laid over a map of the US. All of these figures are beautifully simple and direct. Across all of the figures,
the ranges are indicated by crisp blue and red lines for LP and LH, respectively. The eye is immediately drawn to
the contrast between the lines, and thus to the details the figures are trying to convey. Without a doubt,
the figures are elegant, efficient, and the highlight of this article.    




